DOCSP-41146: agg exp operations (#32)
mongodb/docs-kotlin-sync: source/aggregation/agg-exp-ops.txt

string field called ``name``:

.. code-block:: kotlin
   :copyable: true

   current().getString("name")

To specify a value in an operation, pass it to the ``of()`` constructor method to
convert it to a valid type. The following code shows how to reference a
value of ``1.0``:

.. code-block:: kotlin
   :copyable: true

   of(1.0)

To create an operation, chain a method to your field or value reference.
You can build more complex operations by chaining other methods.

The following example creates an operation to find patients in New
Mexico who have visited the doctor’s office at least once. The operation
performs the following actions:

- Checks if the size of the ``visitDates`` array is greater than ``0``
  by using the ``gt()`` method
- Checks if the ``state`` field value is “New Mexico” by using the
  ``eq()`` method

The ``and()`` method links these operations so that the pipeline stage
matches only documents that meet both criteria.

.. code-block:: kotlin
   :copyable: true

   current()
       .getArray("visitDates")
       .size()
       .gt(of(0))
       .and(current()
           .getString("state")
           .eq(of("New Mexico")))

> While some aggregation stages, such as ``group()``, accept operations

Author: I think that this content is not separate from the previous text, as it is kind of a step by step walk through of what components make up each example

directly, other stages expect that you first include your operation in a
method such as ``computed()`` or ``expr()``. These methods, which take
values of type ``TExpression``, allow you to use your expressions in
certain aggregations.

To complete your aggregation pipeline stage, include your expression
in an aggregates builder method. The following list provides examples of
how to include your expression in common aggregates builder methods:

- ``match(expr(<expression>))``
- ``project(fields(computed("<field name>", <expression>)))``
- ``group(<expression>)``

.. TODO To learn more about these methods, see the
.. :ref:`kotlin-sync-sync-aggregation`.

The examples use the ``listOf()`` method to create a list of
aggregation stages. Then, the examples pass the pipeline to the

> ``aggregate()`` method of ``MongoCollection``.

Author: will move/reword

> Constructor Methods

Author: When we first developed this page for Java sync, we discussed this a lot. I think we should leave as is, because this table describes the functionality of a kotlin/java-native API

available in the driver and corresponding expression operators in the
Query API. The method names link to API documentation and the
aggregation pipeline operator names link to descriptions and examples in
the Server manual documentation. While each method is effectively
equivalent to the corresponding Query API expression, they may differ in
expected parameters and implementation.

.. note::

   The driver generates a Query API expression that may be different
   from the Query API expression provided in each example. However,
   both expressions will produce the same aggregation result.

.. important::

   The driver does not provide methods for all aggregation pipeline operators in
   the Query API. To use an unsupported operation in an
   aggregation, you must define the entire expression using the BSON ``Document``
   type.
   
.. TODO add to note To learn more about the ``Document`` type, see :ref:`<kotlin-sync-document-format>`.

Arithmetic Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can perform an arithmetic operation on a value of type ``MqlInteger`` or
``MqlNumber`` using the methods described in this section.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

>    :widths: 50 50

Reviewer: Similar to above, and for all the Operation subsections, do we need the full list of methods here, or can we just link to the API documentation and keep the subsections dedicated to examples?

Author: Since the tables also provide the 1:1 correspondence with the Query API operators, I think that the tables are valuable

     - :manual:`$add </reference/operator/aggregation/add/>`

   * - `divide() <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlNumber.html#divide(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlNumber)>`__
     - :manual:`$divide </reference/operator/aggregation/divide/>`

   * - | `multiply() for MqlInteger <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlInteger.html#multiply(int)>`__
       | `multiply() for MqlNumber <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlNumber.html#multiply(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlNumber)>`__

     - :manual:`$multiply </reference/operator/aggregation/multiply/>`

   * - `round() <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlNumber.html#round()>`__
     - :manual:`$round </reference/operator/aggregation/round/>`

   * - | `subtract() for MqlInteger <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlInteger.html#subtract(int)>`__
       | `subtract() for MqlNumber <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlNumber.html#subtract(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlNumber)>`__

     - :manual:`$subtract </reference/operator/aggregation/subtract/>`

Suppose you have weather data for a specific year that includes the

> precipitation measurement (in inches) for each day. You want find the average

Reviewer: ```suggestion
precipitation measurement (in inches) for each day. You want to find the average
```

precipitation, in millimeters, for each month.

The ``multiply()`` operator multiplies the ``precipitation`` field by
``25.4`` to convert the value to millimeters. The ``avg()`` accumulator method
returns the average as the ``avgPrecipMM`` field. The ``group()`` method
groups the values by month given in each document's ``date`` field.

The following code shows the pipeline for this aggregation:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/aggregation/aggExpressions.kt
   :start-after: start-arithmetic-aggregation
   :end-before: end-arithmetic-aggregation
   :language: kotlin
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

> The following code provides an equivalent aggregation pipeline in the
> Query API:

Reviewer: Would this be more proper to say? Applies to all instances of this line.

```suggestion
The following code provides an equivalent aggregation pipeline using the
Query API:
```

Author: Originally this was meant to say "in MQL" before the terminology changed. I think "in" is as proper as "that uses" in this context

     - :manual:`$setUnion </reference/operator/aggregation/setUnion/>`

Suppose you have a collection of movies, each of which contains an array
of nested documents for upcoming showtimes. Each nested document
contains an array that represents the total number of seats in the
theater, where the first array entry is the number of premium seats and
the second entry is the number of regular seats. Each nested document
also contains the number of tickets that have already been bought for
the showtime. A document in this collection might resemble the
following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   {
     "_id": ...,
     "movie": "Hamlet",
     "showtimes": [
       {
         "date": "May 14, 2023, 12:00 PM",
         "seats": [ 20, 80 ],
         "ticketsBought": 100
       },
       {
         "date": "May 20, 2023, 08:00 PM",
         "seats": [ 10, 40 ],
         "ticketsBought": 34
       }]
   }

The ``filter()`` method displays only the results matching the provided
predicate. In this case, the predicate uses ``sum()`` to calculate the
total number of seats and compares that value to the number of ``ticketsBought``

> with ``lt()``. The ``project()`` method stores these filtered results as a new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by using ``lt()``. The ``project()`` method stores these filtered results as a new
```

``availableShowtimes`` array.

.. tip::

   You must specify the type of the array that you retrieve with the
   ``getArray()`` method if you work with the values of the

>    array as their specific type.

Reviewer: Q: Little unclear on the meaning of the "if you work with the values of the array as their specific type". Is there any way to reword this?

   In this example, we specify that the ``seats`` array contains values
   of type ``MqlDocument`` so that we can extract nested fields from
   each array entry.

The following code shows the pipeline for this aggregation:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/aggregation/aggExpressions.kt
   :start-after: start-array-aggregation
   :end-before: end-array-aggregation
   :language: kotlin
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

.. note::

   To improve readability, the previous example assigns intermediary values to

>    the ``totalSeats`` and ``isAvailable`` variables. If you don't pull
>    out these intermediary values into variables, the code still produces
>    equivalent results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the ``totalSeats`` and ``isAvailable`` variables. If you don't assign
   these intermediary values to variables, the code still produces
   equivalent results.
```

       availableShowtimes: {
           $filter: {
               input: "$showtimes",
               as: "showtime",
               cond: { $lt: [ "$$showtime.ticketsBought", { $sum: "$$showtime.seats" } ] }
       } }
   } } ]

Boolean Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can perform a boolean operation on a value of type ``MqlBoolean``
using the methods described in this section.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50

   * - Method
     - Aggregation Pipeline Operator

   * - `and() <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlBoolean.html#and(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlBoolean)>`__
     - :manual:`$and </reference/operator/aggregation/and/>`

   * - `not() <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlBoolean.html#not()>`__
     - :manual:`$not </reference/operator/aggregation/not/>`

   * - `or() <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlBoolean.html#or(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlBoolean)>`__
     - :manual:`$or </reference/operator/aggregation/or/>`

Suppose you want to classify very low or high weather temperature
readings (in degrees Fahrenheit) as extreme.

The ``or()`` operator checks to see if temperatures are extreme by comparing

> the ``temperature`` field to predefined values with ``lt()`` and ``gt()``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ``temperature`` field to predefined values by using ``lt()`` and ``gt()``.
```

       | `passNumberTo() <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlNumber.html#passNumberTo(java.util.function.Function)>`__
       | `passStringTo() <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#passStringTo(java.util.function.Function)>`__

     - *No corresponding operator*

Suppose you want to determine how a class is performing against some
benchmarks. You want to find the average final grade for each class and
compare it against the benchmark values.

The following custom method ``gradeAverage()`` takes an array of documents and
the name of an integer field shared across those documents. It calculates the
average of that field across all the documents in the provided array and
determines the average of that field across all the elements in
the provided array. The ``evaluate()`` method compares a provided value to
two provided range limits and generates a response string based on
how the values compare:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/aggregation/aggExpressions.kt
   :start-after: start-convenience-aggregation-methods
   :end-before: end-convenience-aggregation-methods
   :language: kotlin
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

.. tip::

>    One advantage of using the ``passTo()`` method is that you can reuse
>    your custom methods for other aggregations. You could
>    use the ``gradeAverage()`` method to find the average of grades for
>    groups of students filtered by entry year or district, not just their
>    class, for example. You could use the ``evaluate()`` method to evaluate, for
>    example, an individual student's performance, or an entire school's or
>    district's performance.

Reviewer: Suggestion to resolve some duplicative wording

```suggestion
   One advantage of using the ``passTo()`` method is that you can reuse
   your custom methods for other aggregations. For example, you could
   use the ``gradeAverage()`` method to find the average of grades for
   groups of students filtered by entry year or district, not just their
   class. Likewise, you could use the ``evaluate()`` method to evaluate
   an individual student's performance or an entire school's performance.
```

   * - `second() <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#second(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$second </reference/operator/aggregation/second/>`

   * - `week() <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#week(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$week </reference/operator/aggregation/week/>`

   * - `year() <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#year(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$year </reference/operator/aggregation/year/>`

Suppose you have data about package deliveries and want to match
deliveries that occurred on any Monday in the ``"America/New_York"`` time
zone.

If the ``deliveryDate`` field contains any string values representing
valid dates, such as ``"2018-01-15T16:00:00Z"`` or ``"Jan 15, 2018, 12:00
PM EST"``, you can use the ``parseDate()`` method to convert the strings
into date types.

The ``dayOfWeek()`` method determines which day of the week it is and converts
it to a number based on which day is a Monday according to the
``"America/New_York"`` parameter. The ``eq()`` method compares this value to

> ``2``, which corresponds to Monday based on the provided timezone parameter.

Reviewer: This is a little implementation-specific – I think this would serve readers better if it focused on the outcome of using the method.

Refer to any of the sections under :ref:`Operations
<kotlin-sync-aggregation-expression-ops-section>` for examples using these
methods.

.. _kotlin-sync-aggregation-expression-ops-section:

Operations
----------

The following sections provide information and examples for
aggregation expression operations available in the driver.
The operations are categorized by purpose and functionality.

Each section has a table that describes aggregation methods
available in the driver and corresponding expression operators in the
Query API. The method names link to API documentation and the
aggregation pipeline operator names link to descriptions and examples in
the Server manual documentation. While each method is effectively
equivalent to the corresponding Query API expression, they may differ in
expected parameters and implementation.

The example in each section uses the ``listOf()`` method to create a
pipeline from the aggregation stage. Then, each example passes the
pipeline to the ``aggregate()`` method of ``MongoCollection``.

.. note::

   The driver generates a Query API expression that may be different
   from the Query API expression provided in each example. However,

>    both expressions will produce the same aggregation result.

Author: I dont think so, I think paragraph sentence is talking about individual operators, while the note is talking about the completed expression, there is a typo though that i will fix (expression -> operator in the paragraph)

total number of seats and compares that value to the number of ``ticketsBought``
by using the ``lt()`` method. The ``project()`` method stores these
filtered results as a new ``availableShowtimes`` array field.

.. tip::

   You must specify the type of values that an array contains when using
   the ``getArray()`` method to work with the values as any specific
   type. For example, you must specify that an array contains integers
   to perform calculations with those integers elsewhere in
   your application.

   The example in this section specifies that the ``seats`` array
   contains values of type ``MqlDocument`` so that it can extract nested
   fields from each array entry.

The following code shows the pipeline for this aggregation:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/aggregation/aggExpressions.kt
   :start-after: start-array-aggregation
   :end-before: end-array-aggregation
   :language: kotlin
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

.. note::

   To improve readability, the previous example assigns intermediary values to
   the ``totalSeats`` and ``isAvailable`` variables. If you don't assign
   these intermediary values to variables, the code still produces

>    equivalent results.

Author: looks ok to me!

       "city": "Vasqueztown",
       "state": "CO",
       "zip": 27017
     }
   }

The ``getDocument()`` method retrieves the ``mailing.address`` field as a
document so the nested ``state`` field can be retrieved with the
``getString()`` method. The ``eq()`` method checks if the value of the
``state`` field is ``"WA"``.

The following code shows the pipeline for this aggregation:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/aggregation/aggExpressions.kt
   :start-after: start-document-aggregation
   :end-before: end-document-aggregation
   :language: kotlin
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

The following code provides an equivalent aggregation pipeline in
the Query API:

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: true

   [
       { $match: {
           $expr: {
               $eq: [{
                   $getField: {
                       input: { $getField: { input: "$$CURRENT", field: "mailing.address"}},
                       field: "state" }},
                   "WA" ]
   }}}]

Map Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can perform a map operation on a value of either type ``MqlMap`` or
``MqlEntry`` using the methods described in this section.

.. tip::

   Represent data as a map if the data maps

>    arbitrary keys such as dates or item IDs to values.

Reviewer: Thinking about the purpose of this page, is this tip necessary? This seems more relevant for a page about how to structure a data schema, as opposed to performing aggregation operations. We also have a pretty thorough example usecase later on in the section.

Author: can remove
